---
title: 'Good media which doesn't justify its length: Sanderson's Wind and Truth'
---

This is a blog, so I guess I can write about my life. I got a really bad resperatory infection in early January. I was stuck at home for a little over a week with very little ability to do anything but [consume media](https://passwordpaper.com/The-Tatami-Galaxy-and-the-Art-of-Adaptation/). For those that care, I seemed to get better, but kept coughing until I suddenly started coughing a lot more and had horrible chest pain. That was how I ended up with at least one broken rib and another round of antibiotics. Anyway, I'm doing better now, so here's a blogpost.

One of the things I did while sick was read Brandon Sanderson's latest installment in his Stormlight Archive series. It is called Wind and Truth, it is over 1300 pages long, and I've decided that I didn't like it that much. It was entertaining enough, and one of the storylines was fine, but it wasn't worth the wordcount. This post probably will have spoilers for the whole series.

I have to talk about why I'm even reading the Stormlight Archive. They have been good fantasy! The worldbuilding is impeccable, the action is exciting, and the characters go through sweeping arcs that celebrate some of the best things humans see in themselves. However fun the books are, they don't have anything particularly interesting to say to me. The characters don't feel like people. They are obstinate in a way which matches their character design but not in a way that feels realistic to me. Then they go and pull through with solutions which save the day. They develop superpowers which drive their character development and the plot, although I have to hand it to Sanderson for making a magic system where this feels satisfying in context rather than coming off as deus ex machina as that trope so often does. It's a little bit like reading a DND campaign. DND is meant to be fun to play and provide a setting in which characters can interact with each other, but that doesn't mean it creates great literature.

Wind and Truth breaks the mold a little bit, because the characters basically lose. They don't swing in with an emotional breakthrough that coincides with a superpower breakthrough that hands them a pyrrhic victory again. They arguably lose on their own terms, but the big bad ends up ruling the world even if he's unable to necessarily hit some of his wider goals. That's it actually. The scope of the conflict has inflated too much. The series has jumped the shark. Maybe Sanderson was going for an Empire Strikes Back style "oh no, they lost, but that just gives us a desperate situation to recover from!" The problem was that it was too long. Like, maybe having most of the cast go on a vision quest while a few others go on a murder quest was a good segue into widening the scope of a conflict, but why did he need to spend 1300 pages on that? We didn't get anywhere satisfying. My hot take is that this should have been compressed into maybe two hundred pages of vignettes and stuck at the front of the next novel Sanderson wants to write in the series. We didn't need to see Dalinar hunt through a series of ten visions. The relevent bits were like twenty pages. We didn't need to see Shallan fail to kill her mentor five times, because one (with maybe like a set of paragraph-long flashbacks to a few others if you really wanted) got the point across. We didn't need to see the days in between when Adolin started an impossible anti-siege and ended it. The writing was fine. If I had nothing better to do, sure give me 1300 pages of it. I usually do have something better to do though, or at least books which have surprising insights into humanity and satisfying realistic characters in like 400 pages instead of 1300. Turns out people have been writing novels for a long time.

I'm filing the whole 5 book arc of the start of the Stormlight Archive under "pretty good; too long." The existence of that category as a commonly used thing in my brain might give insight into why I generally don't watch television. I will admit that there seem to be some excellent TV series out there, but the medium is such that a typical commitment for consuming them is ten hours watching something that had four hours of filler episodes and could have had 80% of the insight if it were cut to a two hour movie. At least reading books or comics I'm only speed-limited by my own mental capacity to comprehend the thing, which means that I am literally absorbing whatever it has to say as fast as I can. But written media can just be so long that it wasn't worth the time commitment. I feel this way about Andrew Hussie's Homestuck. The thing has a wordcount that is maybe half a book short of the entire Harry Potter series, thousands of frames with no words, and several pages which are ten minute videos or LITERAL VIDEO GAMES YOU PLAY IN YOUR BROWSER. It takes weeks to read if you have nothing better to do, and honestly, it's incredibly good. The characters and dialogue are compelling, the worldbuilding is fun, the plot is so twisted that you can get lost in the joy of unravelling it, and I'm a huge sucker self-referential works which annihilate the 4th wall to move the plot along. Even so, that doesn't make up for how long the thing is. I think it peaks in Act 5 Act 2 (don't ask), and then there's a slow boring build to Game Over (Act 6 Act 6 Intermission 3 in case you're wondering), after which there's a truly spectacular act of either a character coming into their own or deus ex machina, and it ends with a sad fizzle in terms of plot but some admittedly excellent dialogue. The Epilogue is simple prose and excellent and possibly worth the wordcount which clocks in at just over the length of Tolkien's The Fellowship of the Ring by itself, but it doesn't make any sense without slogging through Homestuck Act 6.
