The site that I go to for technology news recently put up a subscription which I decided I had a bit of a moral obligation to pay for. Journalism is hard but beneficial for society. It would be nice if journalists which hold themselves to something like a standard for truth were able to be paid for that. I spend like 2% of my life listening to or reading journalism from the people behind this site. I use an ad-blocker on their site because I don't like being tracked around the internet, and I wish there were other ways good web sites could get money. I would feel like a hypocrite and a leech if I wasn't paying them when I could, and they made the subscription cheap enough that I felt like I could afford it. It costs less than going to a movie theater every month, I could afford that if there were any movies I actually wanted to see, and I get more enjoyment out of their work than that every month.

This got me thinking about news in general. Local news is kind of in a death spiral right now. There exist giant cities where local news is in enough demand to be profitable, but newspapers across America are shutting down or being bought by financial interests outside of the communities they serve. I tried to subscribe to my local newspaper on principle, but I barely read anything in it while my subscription was active, and I couldn't justify the expense. Local television news still has some financial viability, but that is also being bought up by private equity.

I am lucky enough to live close to the state capitol of the state I live in, which means that in my market I have a few local news options which I will actually use, and I can see how I'm supporting the journalists who perform that reporting. I am lucky to have a local newspaper which runs a state politics podcast which is ad-supported, so I feel like I'm contributing a little bit to local journalism by tolerating those ads. I'm not opposed to ads in general. I feel like attention for journalism is a good trade, and podcast advertising lacks many of the tracking concerns I have with letting people pay to run arbitrary javascript on my computer when I visit a website. I also subscribe to the Axios newsletter for my metro area. They send me a newsletter by email every day and I get some ads which won't track me included with my local news. I could subscribe to them, but I only get like 5 minutes of utility from them every day, so I can't really justify it to myself.
