---
title: "Book Post: The Siren's Call and an Attention Deficit"
---

A friend of mine called Chris Hayes's *The Sirens' Call* exceptionally thoughtful, so I gave it a read. It did not disappoint. The thesis of the book is about the commoditization of attention, but I interpret this as a use case for a model the book lays out to understand human attention in general. Disclaimer: I no longer have access to the book, so I'm writing this from memory. I'll explain a few things I took away from the book, and then I want to use the framework the book introduces to talk about how I live with ADHD.

The book conceptualizes attention as a data filter. The world is an exceptionally dense data source. Suppose your hat is blown off of your head on a windy day, and you begin chasing the hat across a field past a tree. You could fill an entire hard drive mapping the relative orientations and positions of the individual leaves on the tree based off of your view of it, but you probably won't notice anything about the tree as you run past it other than maybe the fact that the leaves are moving a lot in the wind and the fact that the tree is not in your path. The thing that allows humans to receive stimuli that contain immense amounts of information about the state of the world while actively noticing almost none of it is attention.

I made up that example. Hayes uses the example of a cocktail party to demonstrate three ways that we pay attention to things. I'm going to use my own nomenclature here, but the examples are his.

1. Directed attention. If you are a guest who is standing in one circle of people listening to a single person talk, you can follow every word that person says. There are many other conversations happening in the party. If you were to try to listen to one of them, you could make out the words they were saying, but you have chosen to listen to this person instead, and so all of the other things you could notice fade into the background.
2. Emergency distraction. If someone drops a stack of plates at the party creating a loud crashing noise, you notice it even if you would have otherwise been focussed on your specific conversation. This works on everyone. Conversation pauses because everyone notices it.
3. Social distraction. If someone says your name in a different conversation, you might be pulled away from your current conversation even if you would have otherwise been focussed on your specific conversation. You name only works on you. This is remarkable. The sounds which form your name are otherwise indistinguishable from whatever other syllables surround you while being ignored. It shows that your brain must be subconsiously processing every noise you hear just in case your name happens to show up, even as those noises are filtered from your conscious attention.

Hayes uses the emergency siren as an example of an intentional hijacking of the automatic response to an emergency distraction. It is theoretically possible to put yourself in an environment which has so many sirens that you learn to ignore them, but for the most part they succeed at their purpose, which is to make you pay attention to something you would otherwise ignore if you were directing your attention at something else. Driving is an activity which requires a person to filter out almost everything they can see or hear that isn't nearby vehicles and the shape of the road ahead of them. An ambulance siren forces your attention out of that flow state so that you can adjust your driving to make up for an emergency vehicle which needs to break the normal driving patterns you have trained yourself to focus on.

The thesis of the book is essentially that distractions are the easiest way to get your attention, so the people who want your directed attention are hijacking your ability to be distracted by emergencies to initially get your attention. The hope may once have been that they can get your directed attention once they have your attention at all, but a crop of companies have risen that care about nothing but getting your attention at all. Additionally, if you are in a modern location where one person (or company or something else which represents the interests of many people) can get your attention, there are probably also other people trying to get your attention there, and so the natural incentives of modernity create information spaces which are full of sirens and flashing lights and garish colors and sheer exhaustion from constantly being distracted. When society put an internet-connected computer in everyone's pocket, it gave us easy access to a literal marketplace for our attention. We very much value the easy access to conversations with our loved ones, to updates about the state of the world, and to entertainment, but by subjecting ourselves to information sources under the control of external entities, we form pools of attention which entities wishing to influence people fight over. Humans can only pay attention to so many things, and there are only so many humans, so that pool, however vast, is finite, and competition is fierce. Thus our phones have fallen down the incentive gradient which is to constantly subject us to infinite-dimensional distraction tug-of-war. Importantly, we enjoy it! At least in the moment, sort of. If we didn't, we wouldn't subject ourselves to it. Yes we can argue that we need these devices for our jobs or to participate in a modern society which makes you scan a QR code to do basic tasks, but come on. Those aren't the things we complain about when we say we spend too much time on our phones.

My favorite chapter in the book is the fifth one (called Alienation). From memory, much of the chapter is an extended comparison of the commoditization of labor when industrialization made man-hours more fungible than ever before and of the commoditization of attention as the internet made the opportunity to present advertisement more fungible than ever before. One of the things that makes this chapter and others hit hard is that Chris Hayes talks a lot about his experience as a host for a cable news show. He has experiences in the trenches of the attention economy, and it shows. I won't go into the chapter more than that, but if you find yourself in a bookstore with time to kill, I highly recommend flipping directly to that chapter and reading for a bit to see if you like it. The chapter is a gut punch. It is beautifully constructed. I make no promises that it is dense with new insight, but I enjoyed it immensely and found its ideas compelling.

One of his chapters talks about how attention can be exchanged for money and power. It's one of my least favorite chapters, but it still contains useful insights. I think he overshoots by trying to say that attention is now the only thing which companies an people are trying to gather for themselves. He makes fun of himself for doing this, but doesn't do the obvious-to-me thing of saying that just because attention is arguably the most important modern lever of power doesn't mean that there aren't other ones. The statement was right there waiting for him! He literally gives an example of a person who is largely unknown but obviously weilds a lot of influence over many people's lives and complains about his own thesis not holding here.

The last thing Hayes writes about is a list of things he thinks people can do to escape the trap which strips us of the ability to direct our attention. Hayes spends a lot of pages earlier in the book talking about the Lincoln-Douglas debates, and how these many hours-long debates were transcribed into newspapers and people read all of them. They were about a single topic, utilized advanced sentence structure, and they were one of the earliest nationwide media events. He has first-hand experience with getting people to pay attention to political content, and this breaks every intuition he has about it. He claims that people in general just can't pay that kind of attention anymore. He can feel himself losing the ability to pay that kind of attention himself! So the end of the book talks about things you can do to fight this tendency. I don't remember all of the things he said, but I'll talk about some things I already do that aligned with his suggestions in a moment. I will say that the one I found most interesting was that he suggested subscribing to a physical newspaper. He points out that a physical newspaper is a device designed to guide your attention. The images are placed to break up the text into manageable pieces, draw the eye to where the editor wants you to look most, and be a visual aid to help with comprehension of the text. I think it's important to note that Hayes is not an attention Marxist. He doesn't mind his attention being bought and sold. He just wants to avoid the feeling of never truly focussing on anything. He doesn't want to lose the ability to think about complicated ideas because there's no place in the world to publicize them in the dog-eat-dog world of algorithmic infinite feeds full of people competing to be the flashiest thing. I want to point out that I think that the physicality of the newspaper is actually very important here. I tried to subscribe to a digital newspaper, and the lack of structure meant that I never actually read anything.

One of the things I've realized about myself from reading things like this book and listening to other people talk and *having eyes* is that I have more resilience to the distraction traps than most people do. Sort of. I read books. I don't use Instagram or TikTok at all. I make it a point to stop looking at my phone at 9pm and leave somewhere else in the house when I go to bed. I often ride the bus or take walks without listening to anything or looking at my phone. I don't have much issue waiting in line without looking at my phone. Don't get me wrong, I still look at my phone a lot. I spend a lot of time scrolling through things. I find myself doing that thing at breakfast where you exit out of an app, go to another app, exit that app, and open the first app again. But I don't think I've lost my ability to focus. I don't feel tied to my phone. I don't feel unrelenting boredom or a gaping void in my life if I don't have it with me for some reason. How did this happen?

The main thing I have to say about this is that I used to be this way. I would spend hours as a high schooler scrolling through effectively-infinite wells of jokes and demotivational posters (if you know, you know). Immediately after college, I realized that I was spending hours scrolling through Facebook meme groups and wasting thought on coming up with my own posts (which weren't very good, and when they were I obsessed over the numbers).
